doc/sphinx/source/conformance.rst, before:

.. _pocl-conformance:

=======================
OpenCL conformance
=======================

Conformance related CMake options
---------------------------------

- ``-DENABLE_CONFORMANCE=ON/OFF``
  Defaults to OFF. This option by itself does not guarantee OpenCL-conformant build;
  it merely ensures that a build fails if some options which would result
  in non-conformant kernel library are given.

  Changes when ENABLE_CONFORMANCE is ON:

    * read-write images are disabled (some 1D/2D image array tests fail),
      even though compiler support is indicated (__opencl_c_read_write_images)

  If ENABLE_CONFORMANCE is OFF, and ENABLE_HOST_CPU_DEVICES is ON,
  the conformance testsuite is disabled in CMake. This is because
  some CTS tests will fail on such build.

Supported & Unsupported optional OpenCL 3.0 features
------------------------------------------------------

This list is only related to CPU devices (basic & pthread drivers).
Other drivers (CUDA, TCE etc) only support 1.2 partially.
Note that 3.0 support on CPU devices requires LLVM 14 or newer.

Supported 3.0 features:

  * Shared Virtual Memory
  * C11 atomics
  * 3D Image Writes
  * SPIR-V

Unsupported 3.0 features:

  * Device-side enqueue
  * Pipes
  * Program Scope Global Variables
  * Non-Uniform Work Groups
  * Read-Write Images
  * Creating 2D Images from Buffers
  * sRGB & Depth Images
  * Device and Host Timer Synchronization
  * Intermediate Language Programs
  * Subgroups
  * Program Initialization and Clean-Up Kernels
  * Work Group Collective Functions
  * Generic Address Space


How to run the OpenCL 3.0 conformance test suite
------------------------------------------------

First you need to enable the suite in the pocl's external test suite set.
This is done by adding ``-DENABLE_TESTSUITES=conformance -DENABLE_CONFORMANCE=ON``
to the cmake command line. After this ``make prepare_examples`` fetches and
prepares the conformance suite for testing. After building pocl with ``make``,
the CTS can be run with ``ctest -L <LABEL>`` where ``<LABEL>`` is a CTest label.

There are three different CTest labels for using CTS, one label covers the full
set tests in CTS, the other two contain a smaller subset of CTS tests. The fastest
is ``conformance_suite_micro_main`` label, which takes approx 10-30 minutes on
current (desktop) hardware. The medium sized ``conformance_suite_mini_main``
can take 1-2 hours on current hardware. The full sized CTS is available
with label ``conformance_suite_full_main``. This can take 10-30 hrs on current
hardware.

If PoCL is compiled with SPIR-V support, three more labels are available, where
``_main`` suffix is replaced by ``_spirv`` (e.g. ``conformance_suite_mini_spirv``)
These labels will run the same tests as the _main variant, but use offline
compilation to produce SPIR-V and use that to create programs,
instead of default creating from OpenCL C source.

Note that running ``ctest -L conformance_suite_micro`` will run *both* variants
(the online and offline compilation) since the -L option takes a regexp.

Additionally, there is a new cmake label, ``conformance_30_only``
to run tests which are only relevant to OpenCL 3.0.

CPU device version 1.2 should also work with CTS 3.0 (tests will be skipped).

Known issues with the conformance testsuite
-----------------------------------------------

- a few tests from ``basic/test_basic`` may fail / segfault because they
  request a huge amount of memory for buffers.

- some tests from ``relationals/test_relationals`` can fail with specific
  LLVM versions, this is an LLVM bug, fixed in LLVM 13.

- a few tests may run much faster if you limit the reported Global memory size
  with POCL_MEMORY_LIMIT env var. In particular, "kernel_image_methods" test
  with "max_images" argument.


.. _sigfpe-handler:

Known issues in pocl / things to be aware of
--------------------------------------------

- Integer division by zero. OpenCL 1.2 specification requires that division by
  zero on integers results in undefined values, instead of raising exceptions.
  This requires pocl to install a handler of SIGFPE. Unfortunately signal
  handlers are per-process not per-thread, and pocl drivers do not run in a
  separate process, which means that integer division by zero will not raise
  SIGFPE for the entire pocl library and also the user's program. The handler
  may be disabled by setting the env variable POCL_SIGFPE_HANDLER to 0.
  Note that this is currently only relevant for x86(-64) + Linux, on all other
  systems this issue is not handled in any way (thus Pocl is likely
  non-conformant there).

- Many of ``native_`` and ``half_`` variants of kernel library functions are mapped
  to the "full" variants.

- the optional OpenGL / D3D extensions are not supported. There is experimental
  support for SPIR

- clUnloadCompiler() only actually unload LLVM after all programs & kernels
  have been released.

- clSetUserEventStatus() called with negative status. The Spec leaves the behaviour
  in this case as "implementation defined", and this part of pocl is
  only very lightly tested by the conformance tests. clSetUserEventStatus()
  called with CL_COMPLETE works as expected, and is heavily used by
  the conversions conformance test.

Conformance tests results (kernel library precision) on tested hardware
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Note that it's impossible to test double precision on the entire range,
therefore the results may vary.

x86-64 CPU with AVX2+FMA, LLVM 4.0, tested on Nov 1, 2017
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

====================   =========================   ===========================================================
        NAME                Worst ULP                 WHERE
====================   =========================   ===========================================================
             add            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
             addD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
      assignment            0.00                      0x0p+0
      assignmentD           0.00                      0x0p+0
            cbrt            0.50                      -0x1.5629d2p+116
            cbrtD           0.59                      0x1.0000000000136p+1022
            ceil            0.00                      0x0p+0
            ceilD           0.00                      0x0p+0
        copysign            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
        copysignD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
             cos            2.37                      0x1.1338ccp+20
             cosD           2.27                      -0x1.d10000000074p+380
            cosh            2.41                      -0x1.602166p+2
            coshD           1.43                      -0x1.98000000003efp+5
           cospi            1.94                      0x1.d73b56p-2
           cospiD           2.46                      -0x1.adffffffffa91p-2
          divide            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
          divideD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
             exp            0.95                      -0x1.762532p+2
             expD           0.94                      0x1.2f0000000023dp+7
           exp10            0.79                      -0x1.309022p+5
           exp10D           0.64                      -0x1.34ffffffffcc9p+8
            exp2            0.79                      -0x1.fa3d0ep+6
            exp2D           0.75                      -0x1.ff00000000417p+9
           expm1            1.00                      -0x1.7a0002p-25
           expm1D           0.99                      -0x1.26p+5
            fabs            0.00                      0x0p+0
            fabsD           0.00                      0x0p+0
            fdim            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            fdimD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
           floor            0.00                      0x0p+0
           floorD           0.00                      0x0p+0
             fma            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
             fmaD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            fmax            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            fmaxD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            fmin            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            fminD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            fmod            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            fmodD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
           fract            { 0.00, 0.00}             {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
           fractD           { 0.00, 0.00}             {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
           frexp            { 0.00, 0}                 0x0p+0
           frexpD           { 0.00, 0}                 0x0p+0
           hypot            1.93                      {0x1.17c998p-127, -0x1.5fedb8p-127}
           hypotD           1.73                      {0x1.5d2ebeed7663cp-1022, 0x1.67457048a2318p-1022}
           ldexp            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0}
           ldexpD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0}
           log10            0.50                      0x1.7fee2ep-1
           log10D           0.50                      0x1.9100000000639p+1022
             log            0.63                      0x1.7fcb3ep-1
             logD           0.75                      0x1.7d00000000381p+0
           log1p            1.00                      -0x1.fa0002p-126
           log1pD           1.00                      -0x1.e000000000001p-1022
            log2            0.59                      0x1.1107a2p+0
            log2D           0.72                      0x1.120000000063dp+0
            logb            0.00                      0x0p+0
            logbD           0.00                      0x0p+0
             mad            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0, 0x0p+0} no ULP check
             madD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0, 0x0p+0} no ULP check
          maxmag            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
          maxmagD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
          minmag            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
          minmagD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            modf        { 0.00, 0.00}                 {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            modfD       { 0.00, 0.00}                 {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
        multiply            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
        multiplyD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
             nan            0.00                      0x0p+0
             nanD           0.00                      0x0p+0
       nextafter            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
       nextafterD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
             pow            0.82                      {0x1.91237cp-1, 0x1.4da146p+8}
             powD           0.80                      {0x1.2bfb4b18164c9p+65, -0x1.b78438ae9c3bdp-8}
            pown            0.65                      {-0x1.9p+6, -2}
            pownD           0.62                      {-0x1.7ffffffffffffp+1, 3}
            powr            0.82                      {0x1.91237cp-1, 0x1.4da146p+8}
            powrD           0.80                      {0x1.2bfb4b18164c9p+65, -0x1.b78438ae9c3bdp-8}
       remainder            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
       remainderD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
          remquo        { 0.00, 0}                    0x0p+0
          remquoD       { 0.00, 0}                    0x0p+0
            rint            0.00                      0x0p+0
            rintD           0.00                      0x0p+0
           rootn            0.69                      {-0x1.e2fe6ep-74, -141}
           rootnD           0.68                      {-0x1.8000000000001p+1, 3}
           round            0.00                      0x0p+0
           roundD           0.00                      0x0p+0
           rsqrt            1.49                      0x1.019566p+124
           rsqrtD           1.49                      0x1.01ffffffffa39p+1016
             sin            2.48                      -0x1.09f07ap+21
             sinD           1.87                      -0x1.f2fffffffffbap+32
          sincos        { 2.48, 2.37}                 {0x1.09f07ap+21, 0x1.1338ccp+20}
          sincosD       { 1.87, 2.27}                 {0x1.f2fffffffffbap+32, 0x1.d10000000074p+380}
            sinh            2.32                      0x1.e76078p+2
            sinhD           1.53                      -0x1.3100000000278p+4
           sinpi            2.13                      -0x1.45f3ep-9
           sinpiD           2.50                      -0x1.46000000000dap-7
            sqrt            0.00                      0x0p+0
            sqrtD           0.00                      0x0p+0
        subtract            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
        subtractD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
             tan            4.35                      -0x1.b4eba2p+22
             tanD           4.00                      -0x1.2f000000003edp+333
            tanh            1.18                      -0x1.ca742ap-1
            tanhD           1.19                      0x1.f400000000395p-1
           tanpi            4.21                      -0x1.f99d16p-3
           tanpiD           4.09                      0x1.f6000000001d3p-3
           trunc            0.00                      0x0p+0
           truncD           0.00                      0x0p+0
====================   =========================   ===========================================================

Commit message:

update documentation with known issues in SPIR-V

doc/sphinx/source/conformance.rst, after:

.. _pocl-conformance:

=======================
OpenCL conformance
=======================

Conformance related CMake options
---------------------------------

- ``-DENABLE_CONFORMANCE=ON/OFF``
  Defaults to OFF. This option by itself does not guarantee OpenCL-conformant build;
  it merely ensures that a build fails if some options which would result
  in non-conformant kernel library are given.

  Changes when ENABLE_CONFORMANCE is ON:

    * read-write images are disabled (some 1D/2D image array tests fail),
      even though compiler support is indicated (__opencl_c_read_write_images)

  If ENABLE_CONFORMANCE is OFF, and ENABLE_HOST_CPU_DEVICES is ON,
  the conformance testsuite is disabled in CMake. This is because
  some CTS tests will fail on such build.

Supported & Unsupported optional OpenCL 3.0 features
------------------------------------------------------

This list is only related to CPU devices (basic & pthread drivers).
Other drivers (CUDA, TCE etc) only support 1.2 partially.
Note that 3.0 support on CPU devices requires LLVM 14 or newer.

Supported 3.0 features:

  * Shared Virtual Memory
  * C11 atomics
  * 3D Image Writes
  * SPIR-V

Unsupported 3.0 features:

  * Device-side enqueue
  * Pipes
  * Program Scope Global Variables
  * Non-Uniform Work Groups
  * Read-Write Images
  * Creating 2D Images from Buffers
  * sRGB & Depth Images
  * Device and Host Timer Synchronization
  * Intermediate Language Programs
  * Subgroups
  * Program Initialization and Clean-Up Kernels
  * Work Group Collective Functions
  * Generic Address Space


How to run the OpenCL 3.0 conformance test suite
------------------------------------------------

First you need to enable the suite in the pocl's external test suite set.
This is done by adding ``-DENABLE_TESTSUITES=conformance -DENABLE_CONFORMANCE=ON``
to the cmake command line. After this ``make prepare_examples`` fetches and
prepares the conformance suite for testing. After building pocl with ``make``,
the CTS can be run with ``ctest -L <LABEL>`` where ``<LABEL>`` is a CTest label.

There are three different CTest labels for using CTS, one label covers the full
set tests in CTS, the other two contain a smaller subset of CTS tests. The fastest
is ``conformance_suite_micro_main`` label, which takes approx 10-30 minutes on
current (desktop) hardware. The medium sized ``conformance_suite_mini_main``
can take 1-2 hours on current hardware. The full sized CTS is available
with label ``conformance_suite_full_main``. This can take 10-30 hrs on current
hardware.

If PoCL is compiled with SPIR-V support, three more labels are available, where
``_main`` suffix is replaced by ``_spirv`` (e.g. ``conformance_suite_mini_spirv``)
These labels will run the same tests as the _main variant, but use offline
compilation to produce SPIR-V and use that to create programs,
instead of default creating from OpenCL C source.

Note that running ``ctest -L conformance_suite_micro`` will run *both* variants
(the online and offline compilation) since the -L option takes a regexp.

Additionally, there is a new cmake label, ``conformance_30_only``
to run tests which are only relevant to OpenCL 3.0.

CPU device version 1.2 should also work with CTS 3.0 (tests will be skipped).

Known issues with the conformance testsuite
-----------------------------------------------

- a few tests from ``basic/test_basic`` may fail / segfault because they
  request a huge amount of memory for buffers.

- some tests from ``relationals/test_relationals`` can fail with specific
  LLVM versions, this is an LLVM bug, fixed in LLVM 13.

- a few tests may run much faster if you limit the reported Global memory size
  with POCL_MEMORY_LIMIT env var. In particular, "kernel_image_methods" test
  with "max_images" argument.


.. _sigfpe-handler:

Known issues in pocl / things to be aware of
--------------------------------------------

- some of the tests in CTS fail to run with SPIR-V offline compilation mode.
  In some cases, llvm-spirv fails to translate SPIR-V to LLVM IR, or the SPIR-V
  fails to validate, and in some cases (e.g. async_copy) unsolved SPIR-V issues
  in PoCL.

- Integer division by zero. OpenCL 1.2 specification requires that division by
  zero on integers results in undefined values, instead of raising exceptions.
  This requires pocl to install a handler of SIGFPE. Unfortunately signal
  handlers are per-process not per-thread, and pocl drivers do not run in a
  separate process, which means that integer division by zero will not raise
  SIGFPE for the entire pocl library and also the user's program. The handler
  may be disabled by setting the env variable POCL_SIGFPE_HANDLER to 0.
  Note that this is currently only relevant for x86(-64) + Linux, on all other
  systems this issue is not handled in any way (thus Pocl is likely
  non-conformant there).

- Many of ``native_`` and ``half_`` variants of kernel library functions are mapped
  to the "full" variants.

- the optional OpenGL / D3D extensions are not supported.

- clUnloadCompiler() only actually unload LLVM after all programs & kernels
  have been released.

- clSetUserEventStatus() called with negative status. The Spec leaves the behaviour
  in this case as "implementation defined", and this part of pocl is
  only very lightly tested by the conformance tests. clSetUserEventStatus()
  called with CL_COMPLETE works as expected, and is heavily used by
  the conversions conformance test.

Conformance tests results (kernel library precision) on tested hardware
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Note that it's impossible to test double precision on the entire range,
therefore the results may vary.

x86-64 CPU with AVX2+FMA, LLVM 4.0, tested on Nov 1, 2017
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

====================   =========================   ===========================================================
        NAME                Worst ULP                 WHERE
====================   =========================   ===========================================================
             add            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
             addD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
      assignment            0.00                      0x0p+0
      assignmentD           0.00                      0x0p+0
            cbrt            0.50                      -0x1.5629d2p+116
            cbrtD           0.59                      0x1.0000000000136p+1022
            ceil            0.00                      0x0p+0
            ceilD           0.00                      0x0p+0
        copysign            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
        copysignD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
             cos            2.37                      0x1.1338ccp+20
             cosD           2.27                      -0x1.d10000000074p+380
            cosh            2.41                      -0x1.602166p+2
            coshD           1.43                      -0x1.98000000003efp+5
           cospi            1.94                      0x1.d73b56p-2
           cospiD           2.46                      -0x1.adffffffffa91p-2
          divide            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
          divideD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
             exp            0.95                      -0x1.762532p+2
             expD           0.94                      0x1.2f0000000023dp+7
           exp10            0.79                      -0x1.309022p+5
           exp10D           0.64                      -0x1.34ffffffffcc9p+8
            exp2            0.79                      -0x1.fa3d0ep+6
            exp2D           0.75                      -0x1.ff00000000417p+9
           expm1            1.00                      -0x1.7a0002p-25
           expm1D           0.99                      -0x1.26p+5
            fabs            0.00                      0x0p+0
            fabsD           0.00                      0x0p+0
            fdim            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            fdimD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
           floor            0.00                      0x0p+0
           floorD           0.00                      0x0p+0
             fma            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
             fmaD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            fmax            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            fmaxD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            fmin            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            fminD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            fmod            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            fmodD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
           fract            { 0.00, 0.00}             {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
           fractD           { 0.00, 0.00}             {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
           frexp            { 0.00, 0}                 0x0p+0
           frexpD           { 0.00, 0}                 0x0p+0
           hypot            1.93                      {0x1.17c998p-127, -0x1.5fedb8p-127}
           hypotD           1.73                      {0x1.5d2ebeed7663cp-1022, 0x1.67457048a2318p-1022}
           ldexp            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0}
           ldexpD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0}
           log10            0.50                      0x1.7fee2ep-1
           log10D           0.50                      0x1.9100000000639p+1022
             log            0.63                      0x1.7fcb3ep-1
             logD           0.75                      0x1.7d00000000381p+0
           log1p            1.00                      -0x1.fa0002p-126
           log1pD           1.00                      -0x1.e000000000001p-1022
            log2            0.59                      0x1.1107a2p+0
            log2D           0.72                      0x1.120000000063dp+0
            logb            0.00                      0x0p+0
            logbD           0.00                      0x0p+0
             mad            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0, 0x0p+0} no ULP check
             madD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0, 0x0p+0} no ULP check
          maxmag            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
          maxmagD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
          minmag            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
          minmagD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            modf        { 0.00, 0.00}                 {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
            modfD       { 0.00, 0.00}                 {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
        multiply            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
        multiplyD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
             nan            0.00                      0x0p+0
             nanD           0.00                      0x0p+0
       nextafter            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
       nextafterD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
             pow            0.82                      {0x1.91237cp-1, 0x1.4da146p+8}
             powD           0.80                      {0x1.2bfb4b18164c9p+65, -0x1.b78438ae9c3bdp-8}
            pown            0.65                      {-0x1.9p+6, -2}
            pownD           0.62                      {-0x1.7ffffffffffffp+1, 3}
            powr            0.82                      {0x1.91237cp-1, 0x1.4da146p+8}
            powrD           0.80                      {0x1.2bfb4b18164c9p+65, -0x1.b78438ae9c3bdp-8}
       remainder            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
       remainderD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
          remquo        { 0.00, 0}                    0x0p+0
          remquoD       { 0.00, 0}                    0x0p+0
            rint            0.00                      0x0p+0
            rintD           0.00                      0x0p+0
           rootn            0.69                      {-0x1.e2fe6ep-74, -141}
           rootnD           0.68                      {-0x1.8000000000001p+1, 3}
           round            0.00                      0x0p+0
           roundD           0.00                      0x0p+0
           rsqrt            1.49                      0x1.019566p+124
           rsqrtD           1.49                      0x1.01ffffffffa39p+1016
             sin            2.48                      -0x1.09f07ap+21
             sinD           1.87                      -0x1.f2fffffffffbap+32
          sincos        { 2.48, 2.37}                 {0x1.09f07ap+21, 0x1.1338ccp+20}
          sincosD       { 1.87, 2.27}                 {0x1.f2fffffffffbap+32, 0x1.d10000000074p+380}
            sinh            2.32                      0x1.e76078p+2
            sinhD           1.53                      -0x1.3100000000278p+4
           sinpi            2.13                      -0x1.45f3ep-9
           sinpiD           2.50                      -0x1.46000000000dap-7
            sqrt            0.00                      0x0p+0
            sqrtD           0.00                      0x0p+0
        subtract            0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
        subtractD           0.00                      {0x0p+0, 0x0p+0}
             tan            4.35                      -0x1.b4eba2p+22
             tanD           4.00                      -0x1.2f000000003edp+333
            tanh            1.18                      -0x1.ca742ap-1
            tanhD           1.19                      0x1.f400000000395p-1
           tanpi            4.21                      -0x1.f99d16p-3
           tanpiD           4.09                      0x1.f6000000001d3p-3
           trunc            0.00                      0x0p+0
           truncD           0.00                      0x0p+0
====================   =========================   ===========================================================
