doc/sphinx/source/features.rst, before:

Supported OpenCL features
=========================

All mandatory features for OpenCL 1.2 are supported
on x86-64+Linux, see :ref:`pocl-conformance` for details.

Known unsupported OpenCL features
=================================

The known unsupported OpenCL (both 1.x and 2.x) features are
listed here as encountered.

Frontend/Clang
--------------

* OpenCL 1.x

  * OpenGL interoperability extension
  * SPIR extension (partially available, see below)

* OpenCL 2.0

  * generic address space (recognized by LLVM 3.8+ but incomplete)
  * pipes (WIP)
  * device-side enqueue

* cl_khr_f16: half precision support (with the exception of  vload_half / vstore_half)

Unimplemented host side functions
---------------------------------

All 1.2 API call should be implemented. The list of unimplemented
2.0 calls can be seen as the NULLs in the ICD dispatch struct in
https://github.com/pocl/pocl/blob/master/lib/CL/clGetPlatformIDs.c

SPIR support
------------

There is some experimental support available for SPIR, with LLVM 5 and newer.
There is some even more experimental support available for SPIR-V, but this
depends on functional llvm-spirv converter. The Khronos official llvm-spirv
is currently unusable for pocl (because it produces LLVM 3.6 bitcode and pocl
requires LLVM 5+ for SPIR, and LLVM 5 refuses to load LLVM 3.6 bitcode).

Compiling from OpenCL sources to SPIR:

     clang -D_CL_DISABLE_HALF -Xclang -cl-std=CL1.2 -D__OPENCL_C_VERSION__=120
     -D__OPENCL_VERSION__=120 -Dcl_khr_int64 -Dcl_khr_byte_addressable_store
     -Dcl_khr_global_int32_base_atomics -Dcl_khr_global_int32_extended_atomics
     -Dcl_khr_local_int32_base_atomics -Dcl_khr_local_int32_extended_atomics
     -Dcl_khr_3d_image_writes -Dcl_khr_fp64 -Dcl_khr_int64_base_atomics
     -Dcl_khr_int64_extended_atomics -emit-llvm -target spir64-unknown-unknown
     -o SPIR_OUTPUT.bc -x cl -c SOURCE.cl
     -include <POCL_SOURCE_DIR>/include/_kernel.h
     -include <POCL_SOURCE_DIR>/include/_enable_all_exts.h

Commit message:

Update documentation & release notes
Since the llvm-spirv converter from the "spirv-6.0" branch
in the official SPIRV-LLVM Khronos repository seems to work
with pocl, update the documentation with experimental SPIR-V
support.

doc/sphinx/source/features.rst, after:

Supported OpenCL features
=========================

All mandatory features for OpenCL 1.2 are supported
on x86-64+Linux, see :ref:`pocl-conformance` for details.

Known unsupported OpenCL features
=================================

The known unsupported OpenCL (both 1.x and 2.x) features are
listed here as encountered.

Frontend/Clang
--------------

* OpenCL 1.x

  * OpenGL interoperability extension
  * SPIR extension (partially available, see below)

* OpenCL 2.0

  * generic address space (recognized by LLVM 3.8+ but incomplete)
  * pipes (WIP)
  * device-side enqueue

* cl_khr_f16: half precision support (with the exception of  vload_half / vstore_half)

Unimplemented host side functions
---------------------------------

All 1.2 API call should be implemented. The list of unimplemented
2.0 calls can be seen as the NULLs in the ICD dispatch struct in
https://github.com/pocl/pocl/blob/master/lib/CL/clGetPlatformIDs.c

SPIR support
------------

There is some experimental support available for SPIR, with LLVM 5 and newer.
There is some even more experimental support available for loading SPIR-V
binaries, but this depends on functional llvm-spirv converter. The converter
must produce LLVM IR in format which pocl's LLVM can consume, so e.g. using
llvm-spirv builf from branch "spirv-3.6.1" against pocl built with LLVM 5 is
unlikely to work. However, here is now a "spirv-6.0" branch in the official
SPIRV-LLVM Khronos repository, and its llvm-spirv + pocl + LLVM 6 seem to
pass some quick tests.

Compiling from OpenCL sources to SPIR:

     clang -D_CL_DISABLE_HALF -Xclang -cl-std=CL1.2 -D__OPENCL_C_VERSION__=120
     -D__OPENCL_VERSION__=120 -Dcl_khr_int64 -Dcl_khr_byte_addressable_store
     -Dcl_khr_global_int32_base_atomics -Dcl_khr_global_int32_extended_atomics
     -Dcl_khr_local_int32_base_atomics -Dcl_khr_local_int32_extended_atomics
     -Dcl_khr_3d_image_writes -Dcl_khr_fp64 -Dcl_khr_int64_base_atomics
     -Dcl_khr_int64_extended_atomics -emit-llvm -target spir64-unknown-unknown
     -o SPIR_OUTPUT.bc -x cl -c SOURCE.cl
     -include <POCL_SOURCE_DIR>/include/_kernel.h
     -include <POCL_SOURCE_DIR>/include/_enable_all_exts.h
